---
layout: clojure
head: Jark
---

h2. Roadmap

<hr>
h2. Previous releases

h3. 0.1 (proof of concept)

* Nailgun-based system to manage classpaths and namespaces on a persistent JVM
* Add classpaths dynamically
* Install clojure packages from maven repositories with ease (cljr integration)
* Lookup clojure documentation on the web
* Command-line interface to NFA (Namespace Function Args)
* Build only on GNU/Linux
* License   : Apache License 2
* Released  : 7 March 2011

<hr>
h2. Current release

h3. 0.2 (Scripting)

* Start and connect to multiple JVM instances 
* Scripting with jark (Connect to a running JVM or start one when running clojure scripts)
* Vimclojure integration
* Vm utilities - gc, threads, stats

<hr>
h2. Upcoming releases

h3. 0.3 (nrepl protocol)

* jark-nrepl-server that implements the nrepl protocol (replaces nailgun server)
* Proof-of-concept nrepl-client written in python (replaces the nailgun client)
* Rich client REPL (jark repl)
** support jark commands within the repl
** completions - filenames and symbols on remote JVM
** Handle *out*, *err* and value coming from remote JVM
* License: EPL (that of clojure's)

h3. 0.4 (Other OS platforms)

* Support jark on common OS platforms (Windows, GNU/Linux, Mac)
** Generate wrapper scripts during build-time
** The scripts are generated for all common OS Platforms
** Rewrite jark-client in haskell to generate native binaries. Has minimum runtime dependencies.
* Support jark-client to run on the Android
* Improved build system (lein build-jark plugin), such that it builds on all OS platforms.

h3. 0.5 (security)

* Trap System exits
* Cookie-based authentication
* Named VM connections 
* Scripts can specify a VM that they can be run on (#!/usr/bin/env jark [--name])
* Blacklisting of clients on remote host

h3. 0.6 (extensions)

* Var inspector module
* Interactive stacktraces in the repl
* Support slime-nrepl/vim-nrepl (if any) clients
* APIs to write/extend jark modules
* monitor module (jark monitor)
** monitor resources on all connected JVMs
** GUI to display the above
* Display GUI programs on the client 

h3. 0.7 (Packaging)

* Debian/Arch/Fedora packaging
* Packaging for Windows, Mac, Android
